Architecture (#965)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/en/deployment-guides/horizontal-scaling.md

---
slug: /en/architecture/horizontal-scaling
sidebar_label: Scaling out
sidebar_position: 10
title: Scaling out
---
import ReplicationShardingTerminology from '@site/docs/en/_snippets/_replication-sharding-terminology.md';
import ConfigFileNote from '@site/docs/en/_snippets/_config-files.md';

## Description

> This example architecture is designed to provide scalability.  It includes three nodes: two combined ClickHouse plus coordination (ClickHouse Keeper) servers, and a third server with only ClickHouse Keeper to finish the quorum of three. With this example, we'll create a database, table, and a distributed table that will be able to query the data on both of the nodes.

Author: I have to come up with a different term instead of standalone, as in this example to make it super simple the third node is using the ClickHouse server install and not the standalone Keeper.

## Level: Basic

<ReplicationShardingTerminology />

## Environment
### Architecture Diagram
![Architecture diagram for 2 shards and 1 replica](@site/docs/en/deployment-guides/images/scaling-out-1.png)

|Node|Description|
|----|-----------|
|chnode1|Data + ClickHouse Keeper|
|chnode2|Data + ClickHouse Keeper|
|chnode3|Used for ClickHouse Keeper quorum|

:::note

> In the more advanced configurations ClickHouse Keeper will be run on separate servers.  This basic configuration is running the Keeper functionality within the ClickHouse Server process.  As you scale out you may decide to separate the ClickHouse Servers from the Keeper servers.  The instructions for deploying ClickHouse Keeper standalone are available in the [installation documentation](/docs/en/getting-started/install.md/#install-standalone-clickhouse-keeper).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In more advanced configurations, ClickHouse Keeper will be running on separate servers.  This basic configuration runs the Keeper functionality within the ClickHouse Server process.  As you scale out, you may decide to separate the ClickHouse Servers from the Keeper servers.  The instructions for deploying ClickHouse Keeper standalone are available in the [installation documentation](/docs/en/getting-started/install.md/#install-standalone-clickhouse-keeper).
```

:::

## Install

Install Clickhouse on three servers following the [instructions for your archive type](/docs/en/getting-started/install.md/#available-installation-options) (.deb, .rpm, .tar.gz, etc.). For this example, you will follow the installation instructions for ClickHouse Server and Client on all three machines.       

## Editing configuration files

<ConfigFileNote />

## chnode1 configuration

> For chnode1 there are five configuration files.  You may choose to combine these files into a single file, but for clarity in the documentation it may be simpler to look at them separately.  As you read through the configuration files you will see that most of the configuration is the same between chnode1 and chnode2; the differences will be highlighted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For chnode1, there are five configuration files.  You may choose to combine these files into a single file, but for clarity in the documentation it may be simpler to look at them separately.  As you read through the configuration files, you will see that most of the configuration is the same between chnode1 and chnode2; the differences will be highlighted.
```

Just editing according to what Grammarly suggested :)

```xml title="enable-keeper.xml on chnode1"
<clickhouse>
  <keeper_server>
    <tcp_port>9181</tcp_port>
 # highlight-next-line
    <server_id>1</server_id>
    <log_storage_path>/var/lib/clickhouse/coordination/log</log_storage_path>
    <snapshot_storage_path>/var/lib/clickhouse/coordination/snapshots</snapshot_storage_path>

    <coordination_settings>
        <operation_timeout_ms>10000</operation_timeout_ms>
        <session_timeout_ms>30000</session_timeout_ms>
        <raft_logs_level>trace</raft_logs_level>
    </coordination_settings>

    <raft_configuration>
    # highlight-start
        <server>
            <id>1</id>
            <hostname>chnode1</hostname>

>             <port>9444</port>

Author: yes, thanks very much.  I ran into a problem with 9444 in my testing of another scenario, I think I need to go through the docs and fix this elsewhere.

- The remote_servers section of the XML specifies each of the clusters in the environment. The attribute `replace=true` replaces the sample remote_servers in the default ClickHouse configuration with the remote_server configuration specified in this file.  Without this attribute the remote servers in this file would be appended to the list of samples in the default.  
- In this example, there is one cluster named `cluster_2S_1R`.
- A secret is created for the cluster named `cluster_2S_1R` with the value `mysecretphrase`.  The secret is shared across all of the remote servers in the environment to ensure that the correct servers are joined together.
- The cluster `cluster_2S_1R` has two shards, and each of those shards has one replica.  Take a look at the architecture diagram toward the beginning of this document, and compare it with the two `shard` definitions in the XML below.  In each of the shard definitions there is one replica.  The replica is for that specific shard.  The host and port for that replica is specified.  The replica for the first shard in the configuration is stored on `chnode1`, and the replica for the second shard in the configuration is stored on `chnode2`.

> - Internal replication for the shards is set to true.  Each shard can have the internal_replication parameter defined in the config file. If this parameter is set to true, the write operation selects the first healthy replica and writes data to it.

Author: I will add the link to that page at the bottom of the guide; I am trying to avoid having many links in the main body of tutorials as (hopefully) people should be able to succeed by following the steps on the page.
